docs(dip31): platform proof of service (#157)
dashpay/dips: dip-0031.md

<pre>
  DIP: 0031
  Title: Platform Proof of Service
  Chain: Core
  Author(s): Pasta
  Special-Thanks:
  Comments-Summary: No comments yet.
  Status: Proposed
  Type: Standard
  Created: 2024-09-12
  License: MIT License
</pre>

# Table of Contents

* [Abstract](#abstract)
* [Motivation](#motivation)
* [Prior Work](#prior-work)
* [PlatformBan P2P Message](#platformban-p2p-message)
* [Validation](#validation)
* [Processing](#processing)
* [Effect](#effect)
* [Signing Process](#signing-process)
* [Ban RPC command](#ban-rpc-command)
* [Copyright](#copyright)

## Abstract

> Core will introduce a new P2P message `platformban`, which, when properly signed and received by a

Author: Added in bd3917f33a921d503b7babef183fbb99de538691

> masternode, will result in a masternode voting against the target in all future DKG sessions until

Reviewer: yes: https://github.com/dashpay/dips/pull/157/files#diff-2aeb834d49089095ca6e575e6e73398b5d2d7ee0df6a63da42afd9475625c15eR72-R73

> masternode, will result in a masternode voting against the target in all future DKG sessions until

Author: Added in 87fe98079e40a77f896d33025b14f126a8e9786a

that targeted masternode has been successfully banned.

## Motivation

To ensure that evonodes provide service on Dash Platform and that non-functioning evonodes do not
participate in the Platform validator set, Platform needs a way to exclude faulty evonodes from
future Platform validator sets / quorums. Since these nodes are not properly providing service, they
should be proof-of-service (PoSe) banned. This DIP outlines a method for Platform to securely notify
Core that a node should be banned.

## Prior Work

* [DIP-0006: Long-Living Masternode
  Quorums](https://github.com/dashpay/dips/blob/master/dip-0006.md)  
* [DIP-0007: LLMQ Signing Requests /
  Sessions](https://github.com/dashpay/dips/blob/master/dip-0007.md)

## PlatformBan P2P Message

Core will introduce a new P2P message, which will facilitate the PoSe banning of nodes identified as
not providing proper service on Platform. This P2P message will be broadcast via the inventory
system and introduced in Protocol Version `70235`.

| Field | Type | Size(bytes) | Description |
| ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- |

> | protxHash | uint256 | 32 | The protxHash of the masternode being banned |

Reviewer 2: masternode -> evonode

| signedHeight | int32_t | 4 | The height at which this message was signed by the platform quorum |
| quorumHash | uint256 | 32 | The quorumHash of the quorum which signed the message |

> | blsSignature | byte[] | 96 | The BLS signature over the message, by the quorum identified by quorumHash |

Reviewer 2: Let's call it `signature` to follow our naming convention

Note: this P2P message intentionally excludes an internal version; instead, it is versioned via the
Protocol Version.

## Validation

When received, a node must validate the message. It should do this by:

1. Check if the node is synced  
   * Penalty: skip validation of message, do not forward, do not mark as received in inventory  
2. Validate the protxHash is in the masternodeList  

>    * Penalty: small P2P penalty (1), as the masternode may have very recently been removed  

Reviewer 2: We should use the term evonode everywhere instead of masternode and do not mix both terms.

Author: I made some updates to improve terminology. The doc does relate to both regular masternodes and evonodes in some parts, so I couldn't just convert them all to evonode.

3. Validate the masternode associated with the protxHash is an evonode and not a regular masternode  
   * Penalty: Ban node, P2P penalty (100)  

> 4. Validate the signedHeight is valid and not too far in the past or future  

Reviewer 2: How far?

Author: @PastaPastaPasta can you add a suggestion to clarify this one?

> 4. Validate the signedHeight is valid and not too far in the past or future  
>    * Penalty: medium P2P penalty (10), it is possible we think we are synced, when we are not  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Validate the signedHeight is within [TipHeight - 576, TipHeight]
   * Penalty: small P2P penalty (1) if signedHeight is inside the range [TipHeight - 576 - 5, TipHeight + 5], it is possible we think we are synced, when we are not, or blocks are coming quickly and a previously valid message is no longer valid.
   * Penalty: medium P2P penalty (10) if signedHeight is outside the mentioned ranges.
```

5. Validate the quorumHash, with quorum type equal to the platform quorum, exists at the
   signedHeight  
   * Penalty: Ban node, P2P penalty (100)  
6. Validate the blsSignature is valid for the quorumHash over the protxHash and signedHeight  
   * Penalty: Ban node, P2P penalty (100)

The inventory system should mark the message as received unless validation case 1 fails.

## Processing

Once validation succeeds, Core shall adjust an internal `PlatformPoSeBan` flag from `false` to

> `true`. This flag should be stored on disk and persisted across restarts.

Reviewer 3: We need to be more precise on where the internal `PlatformPoSeBan` flag should be.
I guess the most appropriate would be `CDeterministicMNState`.

Reviewer: This is an implementation detail; not strictly relevant for DIP imo

Author: Agree with @PastaPastaPasta on this one

> ## Effect

Reviewer 2: Shall we describe how `ProUpServTx` affects `PlatformPoSeBanned`?

Author: Isn't that what the last sentence of the paragraph does?

>The flag `PlatformPoSeBanned` must be set to false when an evonode is [revived](https://github.com/dashpay/dips/blob/master/dip-0003.md#updating-service-features-from-operator-proupservtx) in the deterministic masternode list (DML).

## PlatformBan P2P Message

Core will introduce a new P2P message, which will facilitate the PoSe banning of nodes identified as
not providing proper service on Platform. This P2P message will be broadcast via the inventory
system and introduced in Protocol Version `70235`.

| Field | Type | Size(bytes) | Description |
| ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- |
| protxHash | uint256 | 32 | The protxHash of the evonode being banned |
| signedHeight | int32_t | 4 | The height at which this message was signed by the platform quorum |
| quorumHash | uint256 | 32 | The quorumHash of the quorum which signed the message |
| signature | byte[] | 96 | The BLS signature over the message, by the quorum identified by quorumHash |

Note: this P2P message intentionally excludes an internal version; instead, it is versioned via the
Protocol Version.

## Validation

When received, a node must validate the message. It should do this by:

1. Check if the node is synced  
   * Penalty: skip validation of message, do not forward, do not mark as received in inventory  
2. Validate the protxHash is in the masternodeList  
   * Penalty: small P2P penalty (1), as the evonode may have very recently been removed  

> 3. Validate the masternode associated with the protxHash is an evonode and not a regular masternode  

Author: ```suggestion
3. Validate the protxHash is associated with an evonode and not a regular masternode
```

   * Penalty: Ban node, P2P penalty (100)  
4. Validate the signedHeight is valid and not too far in the past or future  
   * Penalty: medium P2P penalty (10), it is possible we think we are synced, when we are not  
5. Validate the quorumHash, with quorum type equal to the platform quorum, exists at the
   signedHeight  
   * Penalty: Ban node, P2P penalty (100)  
6. Validate the blsSignature is valid for the quorumHash over the protxHash and signedHeight  
   * Penalty: Ban node, P2P penalty (100)

The inventory system should mark the message as received unless validation case 1 fails.

## Processing

Once validation succeeds, Core shall adjust an internal `PlatformPoSeBan` flag from `false` to
`true`. This flag should be stored on disk and persisted across restarts.

## Effect

During subsequent DKG sessions, masternodes should `voteBad` against members marked as
`PlatformPoSeBanned`. If, during the DKG session, `quorumDkgBadVotesThreshold` (as defined by
[DIP-6](https://github.com/dashpay/dips/blob/master/dip-0006.md)) members vote to indicate a member
is bad, it will be prevented from participating in the quorum, resulting in a PoSe penalty bump and

> potentially a PoSe Ban. The flag `PlatformPoSeBanned` must be set to false when an evonode is

Author: Not sure "update" works / is necessary here :thinking:

> potentially a PoSe Ban. The flag `PlatformPoSeBanned` must be set to false when an evonode is

Reviewer 4: nvm 🙈

[revived](https://github.com/dashpay/dips/blob/master/dip-0003.md#updating-service-features-from-operator-proupservtx)
in the deterministic masternode list (DML).

## Signing Process

This should follow the LLMQ signing protocol as described in
[DIP-7](https://github.com/dashpay/dips/blob/master/dip-0007.md). The LLMQ type authorized to sign
this shall be the `consensus.llmqTypePlatform`. On mainnet this is LLMQ_100_67 and on testnet this
is LLMQ_25_67. The signing session parameters are:

| DIP-7 parameter | Value |
| :---- | :---- |
| Request ID | `SHA256(SHA256("PlatformPoSeBan", protxHash, signedHeight))` |
| Message hash | `SHA256(SHA256(protxHash, signedHeight))` |

## Ban RPC command

Core shall expose a new RPC `platform ban`. This RPC shall have the format of: `platform ban
protxHash signedHeight quorumHash blsSignature`. The RPC shall validate all of the information as
described in the [Validation section](#validation). Then, Core shall bundle this information into
the `platformban` P2P message and add it to the inventory system.

> 

Author: @PastaPastaPasta do you concur with the change? This seems in line with your comment in https://github.com/dashpay/dips/pull/157/files#r1809168729

> 

Reviewer: Sure; I'm fine with keeping this out of the dip
